content/post/cassini-identity-lean.md, before:

+++
title = "Proving Cassini's identity in Lean as a beginner's exercise"
date = 2024-03-16T19:23:31+03:00
author = "Olcay Oransoy"
description = ""

draft = true
[_build]
  list = 'never'
+++

{{< math >}}

I recently came across the [Natural Number Game](https://adam.math.hhu.de/#/g/leanprover-community/nng4), [the formalization of the proof of PFR](https://terrytao.wordpress.com/2023/11/18/formalizing-the-proof-of-pfr-in-lean4-using-blueprint-a-short-tour/) over $\mathbb{F}\_2$, [Functional Programming in Lean](https://leanprover.github.io/functional_programming_in_lean/), and a few other resources or talks about Lean, so I finally decided to get my hands dirty with it. My first idea was to check [Mathlib](https://leanprover-community.github.io/mathlib4_docs/) to see what people have been working on. My favorite hello-world-ish thing in math is the Fibonacci numbers, so I started reading the source for [Nat.Fib](https://github.com/leanprover-community/mathlib4/blob/1a1dffdd3d023000aecf7e6940843980dcce9170/Mathlib/Data/Nat/Fib/Basic.lean#L70-L71) and noticed a few identities I know of aren't in the file. Cassini's identity, $F_{n+1}F_{n-1}-F_n^2=(-1)^n$, was the first one to come to mind, so I decided to have a go at that. (I also searched for "cassini" in the repo and the Zulip chat to see if anyone else had an implementation, but I didn't find anything noteworthy.)
## Minor difficulties
Following the [ArchWiki page on Lean](https://wiki.archlinux.org/title/Lean_Theorem_Prover#Lean_4_using_elan), I set up `elan` from the AUR with `aur sync elan-lean`, and set up Lean4 with `elan toolchain install leanprover/lean4:stable` and `elan default stable`. I also installed `lean.nvim` so that I wouldn't have to deal with VSCode.
### Importing Mathlib
I found the command to create a new project on the same page, and I started with `lake new cassini`. I tried to import `Fib` with `import Mathlib.Data.Nat.Fib`, and got the error `unknown package 'Mathlib'`. It took me a few minutes of googling to find that I should've done `lake new cassini math` on [this page](https://leanprover-community.github.io/install/project.html), so I did `cd ..; rm -r cassini; lake new cassini math; cd cassini`.
### Importing Fib
I tried `import Mathlib.Data.Nat.Fib` again, and I got
```
`/home/chromo/.elan/toolchains/leanprover--lean4---v4.7.0-rc2/bin/lake setup-file /home/chromo/code/lean/cassini/Cassini/Basic.lean Init Mathlib.Data.Nat.Fib` failed:

   stderr:
   error: 'Mathlib.Data.Nat.Fib': no such file or directory (error code: 2)
     file: ./.lake/packages/mathlib/././Mathlib/Data/Nat/Fib.lean
```
I did `cd ./.lake/packages/mathlib/././Mathlib/Data/Nat/; ls` to find that `Fib` is a folder and what I want is in `Fib/Basic.lean`, so I did `import Mathlib.Data.Nat.Fib.Basic` instead, and it worked.
### Opening the required namespace
I didn't know how to phrase the proposition in Lean, so I just wrote `theorem cassini_identity` and the Copilot completion gave `theorem cassini_identity (n : ℕ) : fib (n + 1) * fib (n - 1) - fib n ^ 2 = (-1) ^ n :=`. With
```lean
import Mathlib.Data.Nat.Fib.Basic

theorem cassini_identity (n : ℕ) : fib (n + 1) * fib (n - 1) - fib n ^ 2 = (-1) ^ n := by
  sorry
```
I now had the errors
```
▶ 3:36-3:47: error:
function expected at
  fib
term has type
  ?m.12

▶ 3:50-3:61: error:
function expected at
  fib
term has type
  ?m.12

▶ 3:64-3:69: error:
function expected at
  fib
term has type
  ?m.12
```
I got stuck here for some time. My google-fu turned out to be insufficient, so I searched on Zulip and found [this](https://leanprover.zulipchat.com/#narrow/stream/217875-Is-there-code-for-X.3F/topic/.E2.9C.94.20Simply.20connected.20set/near/406373816). I added `set_option autoImplicit false` and the error turned into `unknown identifier 'fib'`. At this point I was a bit confused, because I thought that in contrast to the Zulip thread I found, I _did_ have `fib` because I explicitly said `Mathlib.Data.Nat.Fib.Basic` instead of just `Mathlib` like in the thread. I had the idea of looking at the `Fib` source again, and I found a line `open List Nat` in `Fib/Zeckendorf.lean`, at which point I realized that I needed `open Nat` as well.
### Specifying an integer instead of a natural
Now I had
```
import Mathlib.Data.Nat.Fib.Basic

open Nat

theorem cassini_identity (n : ℕ) : fib (n + 1) * fib (n - 1) - fib n ^ 2 = (-1) ^ n := by
  sorry
```
and yet another error message
```
▶ 5:77-5:79: error:
failed to synthesize instance
  Neg ℕ
```
which was pretty self-explanatory. `-1` isn't a natural, so I needed to specify that it's a $\mathbb{Z}$ and not a $\mathbb{N}$. I don't remember how I arrived at `(-1 : ℤ)`, but I remember that it didn't take me as long as the previous problem to solve.

I finally had a valid file! Now to get rid of the `declaration uses 'sorry'`.
### Some progress
I thought that the determinant proof with $$F_{n-1}F_{n+1}-F_{n}^{2}=\det \left[{\begin{matrix}F_{n+1}&F_{n}\\\\F_{n}&F_{n-1}\end{matrix}}\right]=\det \left[{\begin{matrix}1&1\\\\1&0\end{matrix}}\right]^{n}=\left(\det \left[{\begin{matrix}1&1\\\\1&0\end{matrix}}\right]\right)^{n}=(-1)^{n}$$
would be too hard to implement, so I just decided to implement the inductive proof:
$$\begin{align}
F_{n+1}F_{n-1}-F_{n}^2&=(-1)^{n}\\\\
F_{n+1}F_{n-1}+F_{n+1}F_n-F_{n}^2-F_nF_{n+1}&=(-1)^{n}\\\\
F_{n+1}(F_{n-1}+F_{n})-F_{n}(F_{n}+F_{n+1})&=(-1)^{n}\\\\
F_{n+1}^2-F_{n}F_{n+1}&=(-1)^{n}\\\\
F_{n}F_{n+1}-F_{n+1}^2&=(-1)^{n+1}
\end{align}$$
I recalled an example of an inductive proof, again, from the `Fib.Basic` source:
```lean
theorem le_fib_self {n : ℕ} (five_le_n : 5 ≤ n) : n ≤ fib n := by
  induction' five_le_n with n five_le_n IH
  ·-- 5 ≤ fib 5
    rfl
  · -- n + 1 ≤ fib (n + 1) for 5 ≤ n
    rw [succ_le_iff]
    calc
      n ≤ fib n := IH
      _ < fib (n + 1) := fib_lt_fib_succ (le_trans (by decide) five_le_n)
```
I noticed the `(five_le_n : 5 ≤ n)` and realized I needed something similar, as the identity had a $F_{n-1}$. Sticking to the example, I got to
```
import Mathlib.Data.Nat.Fib.Basic

open Nat

theorem cassini_identity (n : ℕ) (n_pos : 0 < n) : fib (n + 1) * fib (n - 1) - fib n ^ 2 = (-1 : ℤ) ^ n := by
induction' n_pos with n n_pos IH
rfl
```
giving
```
case step
n✝ n : ℕ
n_pos : Nat.le (succ 0) n
IH : ↑(fib (n + 1)) * ↑(fib (n - 1)) - ↑(fib n) ^ 2 = (-1) ^ n
⊢ ↑(fib (succ n + 1)) * ↑(fib (succ n - 1)) - ↑(fib (succ n)) ^ 2 = (-1) ^ succ n
```
### Intermediate goal
I had no idea how to add $+F_{n}F_{n+1}-F_{n}F_{n+1}$ to the LHS, so I had to think for a bit. I recalled the `add_zero` from the Natural Number Game, and I thought that if I had some intermediate result that $0=F_{n}F_{n+1}-F_{n}F_{n+1}$, I could rewrite the new zero on the LHS with it. I found on [this](https://lean-lang.org/theorem_proving_in_lean4/propositions_and_proofs.html#introducing-auxiliary-subgoals) page that I can create intermediate results with `have`. At this point I went to dinner, and while eating I had an idea: I could just set $F_{n+1}(F_{n-1}+F_{n})-F_{n}(F_{n}+F_{n+1})=(-1)^{n}$ as the intermediate result on its own and prove it by simplifying it to the IH. I didn't remember almost any of the arithmetic theorems, so I just found a list of basic theorems for [rings](https://leanprover-community.github.io/mathlib4_docs/Mathlib/Algebra/Ring/Defs.html) and [groups](https://leanprover-community.github.io/mathlib4_docs/Mathlib/Algebra/Group/Defs.html), and I got to `have h1 : fib (n + 1) * (fib (n - 1) + fib n) - fib n * (fib n + fib (n + 1)) = (-1 : ℤ) ^ n := by rw [mul_add, mul_add, sub_add_eq_sub_sub, add_sub_right_comm, add_sub_assoc]`.

Note: An interesting observation is that I didn't notice that the line was getting so long. I think this is because my focus was more on the info panel instead of the code itself.

At this point I had `⊢ ↑(fib (n + 1)) * ↑(fib (n - 1)) - ↑(fib n) * ↑(fib n) + (↑(fib (n + 1)) * ↑(fib n) - ↑(fib n) * ↑(fib (n + 1))) = (-1) ^ n` as the goal. I recalled a tactic called `simp` from some random Copilot suggestion from when I was defining `cassini_identity`, so I tried that and got `simp made no progress`, even though I had two of the same term. I thought that it was probably because the factors were in the wrong order, i.e. $F_{n+1}F_n-F_nF_{n+1}$ instead of $F_{n+1}F_n-F_{n+1}F_n$. I remembered from NNG that I could rewrite a specific occurrence with `nth_rewrite`, so I added `nth_rewrite 4 [mul_comm]; simp` and it worked, giving me `⊢ ↑(fib (n + 1)) * ↑(fib (n - 1)) - ↑(fib n) * ↑(fib n) = (-1) ^ n`. This is precisely the inductive hypothesis, so I tried `exact IH` and got:
```
type mismatch
  IH
has type
  ↑(fib (n + 1)) * ↑(fib (n - 1)) - ↑(fib n) ^ 2 = (-1) ^ n : Prop
but is expected to have type
  ↑(fib (n + 1)) * ↑(fib (n - 1)) - ↑(fib n) * ↑(fib n) = (-1) ^ n : Prop
```
It wasn't _precisely_ the inductive hypothesis, so I searched Mathlib to find `pow_two`, and I ended up with
```lean
import Mathlib.Data.Nat.Fib.Basic

open Nat Int

theorem cassini_identity (n : ℕ) (n_pos : 0 < n) : fib (n + 1) * fib (n - 1) - fib n ^ 2 = (-1 : ℤ) ^ n := by
induction' n_pos with n n_pos IH
rfl
have h0 : fib (n - 1) + fib n = fib (n + 1) := by rw [fib_add_one]; rw [← zero_lt_iff]; exact n_pos
have h1 : fib (n + 1) * (fib (n - 1) + fib n) - fib n * (fib n + fib (n + 1)) = (-1 : ℤ) ^ n := by rw [mul_add, mul_add, sub_add_eq_sub_sub, add_sub_right_comm, add_sub_assoc]; nth_rewrite 4 [mul_comm]; simp; rw [← pow_two]; exact IH
```
and it worked! I'm now realizing as I write this that this is pretty unreadable, but it's what I had while I was working on it.
### Subtraction problems
I now had
```
case step
n✝ n : ℕ
n_pos : Nat.le (Nat.succ 0) n
IH : ↑(fib (n + 1)) * ↑(fib (n - 1)) - ↑(fib n) ^ 2 = (-1) ^ n
h1 : ↑(fib (n + 1)) * (↑(fib (n - 1)) + ↑(fib n)) - ↑(fib n) * (↑(fib n) + ↑(fib (n + 1))) = (-1) ^ n
⊢ ↑(fib (Nat.succ n + 1)) * ↑(fib (Nat.succ n - 1)) - ↑(fib (Nat.succ n)) ^ 2 = (-1) ^ Nat.succ n
```

I added `rw [succ_eq_add_one]; simp`, but `simp` only made `n + 1 - 1` into `n` and didn't make `n + 1 + 1` into `n + 2`. I tried `one_add_one_eq_two`, but it didn't work because I had `n + 1 + 1` which parses as `(n + 1) + 1`, not `n + (1 + 1)`. Doing `add_assoc` first did the trick.

Now I needed to get the `(↑(fib n) + ↑(fib (n + 1)))` in `h1` to be `fib (n + 2)`, so I tried `← fib_add_two` and got:
```
tactic 'rewrite' failed, did not find instance of the pattern in the target expression
  fib ?m.8163 + fib (?m.8163 + 1)
```
I had a hunch that this was because of the up arrows, which I assumed to be typecasts from $\mathbb{N}$ to $\mathbb{Z}$, so I looked through the `Int` documentation and tried `← ofNat_add`. It worked, and next was turning `↑(fib (n - 1)) + ↑(fib n)` into `fib (n + 1)`. I would have to use `n_pos` for this, so I decided to make it an intermediate goal. I had `have h0 : fib (n - 1) + fib n = fib (n + 1) := by rw [fib_add_one]`, with `⊢ n ≠ 0`. I found `zero_lt_iff` from the documentation.

### Negation
I was almost done, I had
```
import Mathlib.Data.Nat.Fib.Basic

open Nat Int

theorem cassini_identity (n : ℕ) (n_pos : 0 < n) : fib (n + 1) * fib (n - 1) - fib n ^ 2 = (-1 : ℤ) ^ n := by
induction' n_pos with n n_pos IH
rfl
have h0 : fib (n - 1) + fib n = fib (n + 1) := by rw [fib_add_one]; rw [← zero_lt_iff]; exact n_pos
have h1 : fib (n + 1) * (fib (n - 1) + fib n) - fib n * (fib n + fib (n + 1)) = (-1 : ℤ) ^ n := by rw [mul_add, mul_add, sub_add_eq_sub_sub, add_sub_right_comm, add_sub_assoc]; nth_rewrite 4 [mul_comm]; simp; rw [← pow_two]; exact IH
rw [← ofNat_add, ← ofNat_add, ← fib_add_two] at h1
rw [succ_eq_add_one, add_assoc, one_add_one_eq_two]
simp
```
with
```
h1 : ↑(fib (n + 1)) * ↑(fib (n - 1) + fib n) - ↑(fib n) * ↑(fib (n + 2)) = (-1) ^ n
⊢ ↑(fib (n + 2)) * ↑(fib n) - ↑(fib (n + 1)) ^ 2 = (-1) ^ (n + 1)
```

I needed to negate both sides, and turn the negation into a `-1` factor, and include it in the power on the RHS. Scouring the `Group` documentation again, I found `neg_sub` and `neg_eq_neg_one_mul`, and finally finished the proof.
## End result
Here's what I ended up with:

```lean
import Mathlib.Data.Nat.Fib.Basic

open Nat Int

theorem cassini_identity (n : ℕ) (n_pos : 0 < n) : fib (n + 1) * fib (n - 1) - fib n ^ 2 = (-1 : ℤ) ^ n := by
induction' n_pos with n n_pos IH
rfl
have h0 : fib (n - 1) + fib n = fib (n + 1) := by rw [fib_add_one]; rw [← zero_lt_iff]; exact n_pos
have h1 : fib (n + 1) * (fib (n - 1) + fib n) - fib n * (fib n + fib (n + 1)) = (-1 : ℤ) ^ n := by rw [mul_add, mul_add, sub_add_eq_sub_sub, add_sub_right_comm, add_sub_assoc]; nth_rewrite 4 [mul_comm]; simp; rw [← pow_two]; exact IH
rw [← ofNat_add, ← ofNat_add, ← fib_add_two, h0] at h1
rw [succ_eq_add_one, add_assoc, one_add_one_eq_two]
simp
rw [← neg_sub, pow_two]
nth_rewrite 2 [mul_comm]
rw [h1, neg_eq_neg_one_mul, pow_succ]
```

Seeing the `▶ goals accomplished 🎉` was pretty satisfying, but my code itself on the other hand, was not. I thought that there's probably a much less verbose way of doing this (that isn't just throwing together what I learnt from the NNG and whatever I happened to find in the documentation), so I [posted it](https://leanprover.zulipchat.com/#narrow/stream/113489-new-members/topic/Feedback.20for.20a.20proof.20of.20Cassini's.20identity) on the Zulip chat for feedback.

Unsurprisingly, I have a long way to go, since Kevin Buzzard gave this proof:
```lean
theorem cassini_identity (m : ℕ) :
    fib (m + 2) * fib m - fib (m + 1) ^ 2 = (-1 : ℤ) ^ (m + 1) := by
  induction m with
  | zero => rfl
  | succ n ih =>
    rw [Nat.succ_eq_add_one, pow_add, pow_one]
    repeat rw [fib_add_two] at *
    push_cast at *
    polyrith
```

_[appropriate spongebob sound effect]_

<audio controls src="/spongebob_end.wav" />

## Reflection
TODO
## Next steps
TODO

Commit message:

finished and published cassini-identity-lean

content/post/cassini-identity-lean.md, after:

+++
title = "Proving Cassini's identity in Lean as a beginner's exercise"
date = 2024-03-16T19:23:31+03:00
author = "Olcay Oransoy"
description = ""
+++

{{< math >}}

I recently came across the [Natural Number Game](https://adam.math.hhu.de/#/g/leanprover-community/nng4), [the formalization of the proof of PFR](https://terrytao.wordpress.com/2023/11/18/formalizing-the-proof-of-pfr-in-lean4-using-blueprint-a-short-tour/) over $\mathbb{F}\_2$, [Functional Programming in Lean](https://leanprover.github.io/functional_programming_in_lean/), and a few other resources or talks about Lean, so I finally decided to get my hands dirty with it. My first idea was to check [Mathlib](https://leanprover-community.github.io/mathlib4_docs/) to see what people have been working on. My favorite hello-world-ish thing in math is the Fibonacci numbers, so I started reading the source for [Nat.Fib](https://github.com/leanprover-community/mathlib4/blob/1a1dffdd3d023000aecf7e6940843980dcce9170/Mathlib/Data/Nat/Fib/Basic.lean#L70-L71) and noticed a few identities I know of aren't in the file. Cassini's identity, $F_{n+1}F_{n-1}-F_n^2=(-1)^n$, was the first one to come to mind, so I decided to have a go at that. (I also searched for "cassini" in the repo and the Zulip chat to see if anyone else had an implementation, but I didn't find anything noteworthy.)
## Minor difficulties
Following the [ArchWiki page on Lean](https://wiki.archlinux.org/title/Lean_Theorem_Prover#Lean_4_using_elan), I set up `elan` from the AUR with `aur sync elan-lean`, and set up Lean4 with `elan toolchain install leanprover/lean4:stable` and `elan default stable`. I also installed `lean.nvim` so that I wouldn't have to deal with VSCode.
### Importing Mathlib
I found the command to create a new project on the same page, and I started with `lake new cassini`. I tried to import `Fib` with `import Mathlib.Data.Nat.Fib`, and got the error `unknown package 'Mathlib'`. It took me a few minutes of googling to find that I should've done `lake new cassini math` on [this page](https://leanprover-community.github.io/install/project.html), so I did `cd ..; rm -r cassini; lake new cassini math; cd cassini`.
### Importing Fib
I tried `import Mathlib.Data.Nat.Fib` again, and I got
```
`/home/chromo/.elan/toolchains/leanprover--lean4---v4.7.0-rc2/bin/lake setup-file /home/chromo/code/lean/cassini/Cassini/Basic.lean Init Mathlib.Data.Nat.Fib` failed:

   stderr:
   error: 'Mathlib.Data.Nat.Fib': no such file or directory (error code: 2)
     file: ./.lake/packages/mathlib/././Mathlib/Data/Nat/Fib.lean
```
I did `cd ./.lake/packages/mathlib/././Mathlib/Data/Nat/; ls` to find that `Fib` is a folder and what I want is in `Fib/Basic.lean`, so I did `import Mathlib.Data.Nat.Fib.Basic` instead, and it worked.
### Opening the required namespace
I didn't know how to phrase the proposition in Lean, so I just wrote `theorem cassini_identity` and the Copilot completion gave `theorem cassini_identity (n : ℕ) : fib (n + 1) * fib (n - 1) - fib n ^ 2 = (-1) ^ n :=`. With
```lean
import Mathlib.Data.Nat.Fib.Basic

theorem cassini_identity (n : ℕ) : fib (n + 1) * fib (n - 1) - fib n ^ 2 = (-1) ^ n := by
  sorry
```
I now had the errors
```
▶ 3:36-3:47: error:
function expected at
  fib
term has type
  ?m.12

▶ 3:50-3:61: error:
function expected at
  fib
term has type
  ?m.12

▶ 3:64-3:69: error:
function expected at
  fib
term has type
  ?m.12
```
I got stuck here for some time. My google-fu turned out to be insufficient, so I searched on Zulip and found [this](https://leanprover.zulipchat.com/#narrow/stream/217875-Is-there-code-for-X.3F/topic/.E2.9C.94.20Simply.20connected.20set/near/406373816). I added `set_option autoImplicit false` and the error turned into `unknown identifier 'fib'`. At this point I was a bit confused, because I thought that in contrast to the Zulip thread I found, I _did_ have `fib` because I explicitly said `Mathlib.Data.Nat.Fib.Basic` instead of just `Mathlib` like in the thread. I had the idea of looking at the `Fib` source again, and I found a line `open List Nat` in `Fib/Zeckendorf.lean`, at which point I realized that I needed `open Nat` as well.
### Specifying an integer instead of a natural
Now I had
```
import Mathlib.Data.Nat.Fib.Basic

open Nat

theorem cassini_identity (n : ℕ) : fib (n + 1) * fib (n - 1) - fib n ^ 2 = (-1) ^ n := by
  sorry
```
and yet another error message
```
▶ 5:77-5:79: error:
failed to synthesize instance
  Neg ℕ
```
which was pretty self-explanatory. `-1` isn't a natural, so I needed to specify that it's a $\mathbb{Z}$ and not a $\mathbb{N}$. I don't remember how I arrived at `(-1 : ℤ)`, but I remember that it didn't take me as long as the previous problem to solve.

I finally had a valid file! Now to get rid of the `declaration uses 'sorry'`.
### Some progress
I thought that the determinant proof with $$F_{n-1}F_{n+1}-F_{n}^{2}=\det \left[{\begin{matrix}F_{n+1}&F_{n}\\\\F_{n}&F_{n-1}\end{matrix}}\right]=\det \left[{\begin{matrix}1&1\\\\1&0\end{matrix}}\right]^{n}=\left(\det \left[{\begin{matrix}1&1\\\\1&0\end{matrix}}\right]\right)^{n}=(-1)^{n}$$
would be too hard to implement, so I just decided to implement the inductive proof:
$$\begin{align}
F_{n+1}F_{n-1}-F_{n}^2&=(-1)^{n}\\\\
F_{n+1}F_{n-1}+F_{n+1}F_n-F_{n}^2-F_nF_{n+1}&=(-1)^{n}\\\\
F_{n+1}(F_{n-1}+F_{n})-F_{n}(F_{n}+F_{n+1})&=(-1)^{n}\\\\
F_{n+1}^2-F_{n}F_{n+1}&=(-1)^{n}\\\\
F_{n}F_{n+1}-F_{n+1}^2&=(-1)^{n+1}
\end{align}$$
I recalled an example of an inductive proof, again, from the `Fib.Basic` source:
```lean
theorem le_fib_self {n : ℕ} (five_le_n : 5 ≤ n) : n ≤ fib n := by
  induction' five_le_n with n five_le_n IH
  ·-- 5 ≤ fib 5
    rfl
  · -- n + 1 ≤ fib (n + 1) for 5 ≤ n
    rw [succ_le_iff]
    calc
      n ≤ fib n := IH
      _ < fib (n + 1) := fib_lt_fib_succ (le_trans (by decide) five_le_n)
```
I noticed the `(five_le_n : 5 ≤ n)` and realized I needed something similar, as the identity had a $F_{n-1}$. Sticking to the example, I got to
```
import Mathlib.Data.Nat.Fib.Basic

open Nat

theorem cassini_identity (n : ℕ) (n_pos : 0 < n) : fib (n + 1) * fib (n - 1) - fib n ^ 2 = (-1 : ℤ) ^ n := by
induction' n_pos with n n_pos IH
rfl
```
giving
```
case step
n✝ n : ℕ
n_pos : Nat.le (succ 0) n
IH : ↑(fib (n + 1)) * ↑(fib (n - 1)) - ↑(fib n) ^ 2 = (-1) ^ n
⊢ ↑(fib (succ n + 1)) * ↑(fib (succ n - 1)) - ↑(fib (succ n)) ^ 2 = (-1) ^ succ n
```
### Intermediate goal
I had no idea how to add $+F_{n}F_{n+1}-F_{n}F_{n+1}$ to the LHS, so I had to think for a bit. I recalled the `add_zero` from the Natural Number Game, and I thought that if I had some intermediate result that $0=F_{n}F_{n+1}-F_{n}F_{n+1}$, I could rewrite the new zero on the LHS with it. I found on [this](https://lean-lang.org/theorem_proving_in_lean4/propositions_and_proofs.html#introducing-auxiliary-subgoals) page that I can create intermediate results with `have`. At this point I went to dinner, and while eating I had an idea: I could just set $F_{n+1}(F_{n-1}+F_{n})-F_{n}(F_{n}+F_{n+1})=(-1)^{n}$ as the intermediate result on its own and prove it by simplifying it to the IH. I didn't remember almost any of the arithmetic theorems, so I just found a list of basic theorems for [rings](https://leanprover-community.github.io/mathlib4_docs/Mathlib/Algebra/Ring/Defs.html) and [groups](https://leanprover-community.github.io/mathlib4_docs/Mathlib/Algebra/Group/Defs.html), and I got to `have h1 : fib (n + 1) * (fib (n - 1) + fib n) - fib n * (fib n + fib (n + 1)) = (-1 : ℤ) ^ n := by rw [mul_add, mul_add, sub_add_eq_sub_sub, add_sub_right_comm, add_sub_assoc]`.

Note: An interesting observation is that I didn't notice that the line was getting so long. I think this is because my focus was more on the info panel instead of the code itself.

At this point I had `⊢ ↑(fib (n + 1)) * ↑(fib (n - 1)) - ↑(fib n) * ↑(fib n) + (↑(fib (n + 1)) * ↑(fib n) - ↑(fib n) * ↑(fib (n + 1))) = (-1) ^ n` as the goal. I recalled a tactic called `simp` from some random Copilot suggestion from when I was defining `cassini_identity`, so I tried that and got `simp made no progress`, even though I had two of the same term. I thought that it was probably because the factors were in the wrong order, i.e. $F_{n+1}F_n-F_nF_{n+1}$ instead of $F_{n+1}F_n-F_{n+1}F_n$. I remembered from NNG that I could rewrite a specific occurrence with `nth_rewrite`, so I added `nth_rewrite 4 [mul_comm]; simp` and it worked, giving me `⊢ ↑(fib (n + 1)) * ↑(fib (n - 1)) - ↑(fib n) * ↑(fib n) = (-1) ^ n`. This is precisely the inductive hypothesis, so I tried `exact IH` and got:
```
type mismatch
  IH
has type
  ↑(fib (n + 1)) * ↑(fib (n - 1)) - ↑(fib n) ^ 2 = (-1) ^ n : Prop
but is expected to have type
  ↑(fib (n + 1)) * ↑(fib (n - 1)) - ↑(fib n) * ↑(fib n) = (-1) ^ n : Prop
```
It wasn't _precisely_ the inductive hypothesis, so I searched Mathlib to find `pow_two`, and I ended up with
```lean
import Mathlib.Data.Nat.Fib.Basic

open Nat Int

theorem cassini_identity (n : ℕ) (n_pos : 0 < n) : fib (n + 1) * fib (n - 1) - fib n ^ 2 = (-1 : ℤ) ^ n := by
induction' n_pos with n n_pos IH
rfl
have h0 : fib (n - 1) + fib n = fib (n + 1) := by rw [fib_add_one]; rw [← zero_lt_iff]; exact n_pos
have h1 : fib (n + 1) * (fib (n - 1) + fib n) - fib n * (fib n + fib (n + 1)) = (-1 : ℤ) ^ n := by rw [mul_add, mul_add, sub_add_eq_sub_sub, add_sub_right_comm, add_sub_assoc]; nth_rewrite 4 [mul_comm]; simp; rw [← pow_two]; exact IH
```
and it worked! I'm now realizing as I write this that this is pretty unreadable, but it's what I had while I was working on it.
### Subtraction problems
I now had
```
case step
n✝ n : ℕ
n_pos : Nat.le (Nat.succ 0) n
IH : ↑(fib (n + 1)) * ↑(fib (n - 1)) - ↑(fib n) ^ 2 = (-1) ^ n
h1 : ↑(fib (n + 1)) * (↑(fib (n - 1)) + ↑(fib n)) - ↑(fib n) * (↑(fib n) + ↑(fib (n + 1))) = (-1) ^ n
⊢ ↑(fib (Nat.succ n + 1)) * ↑(fib (Nat.succ n - 1)) - ↑(fib (Nat.succ n)) ^ 2 = (-1) ^ Nat.succ n
```

I added `rw [succ_eq_add_one]; simp`, but `simp` only made `n + 1 - 1` into `n` and didn't make `n + 1 + 1` into `n + 2`. I tried `one_add_one_eq_two`, but it didn't work because I had `n + 1 + 1` which parses as `(n + 1) + 1`, not `n + (1 + 1)`. Doing `add_assoc` first did the trick.

Now I needed to get the `(↑(fib n) + ↑(fib (n + 1)))` in `h1` to be `fib (n + 2)`, so I tried `← fib_add_two` and got:
```
tactic 'rewrite' failed, did not find instance of the pattern in the target expression
  fib ?m.8163 + fib (?m.8163 + 1)
```
I had a hunch that this was because of the up arrows, which I assumed to be typecasts from $\mathbb{N}$ to $\mathbb{Z}$, so I looked through the `Int` documentation and tried `← ofNat_add`. It worked, and next was turning `↑(fib (n - 1)) + ↑(fib n)` into `fib (n + 1)`. I would have to use `n_pos` for this, so I decided to make it an intermediate goal. I had `have h0 : fib (n - 1) + fib n = fib (n + 1) := by rw [fib_add_one]`, with `⊢ n ≠ 0`. I found `zero_lt_iff` from the documentation.

### Negation
I was almost done, I had
```
import Mathlib.Data.Nat.Fib.Basic

open Nat Int

theorem cassini_identity (n : ℕ) (n_pos : 0 < n) : fib (n + 1) * fib (n - 1) - fib n ^ 2 = (-1 : ℤ) ^ n := by
induction' n_pos with n n_pos IH
rfl
have h0 : fib (n - 1) + fib n = fib (n + 1) := by rw [fib_add_one]; rw [← zero_lt_iff]; exact n_pos
have h1 : fib (n + 1) * (fib (n - 1) + fib n) - fib n * (fib n + fib (n + 1)) = (-1 : ℤ) ^ n := by rw [mul_add, mul_add, sub_add_eq_sub_sub, add_sub_right_comm, add_sub_assoc]; nth_rewrite 4 [mul_comm]; simp; rw [← pow_two]; exact IH
rw [← ofNat_add, ← ofNat_add, ← fib_add_two] at h1
rw [succ_eq_add_one, add_assoc, one_add_one_eq_two]
simp
```
with
```
h1 : ↑(fib (n + 1)) * ↑(fib (n - 1) + fib n) - ↑(fib n) * ↑(fib (n + 2)) = (-1) ^ n
⊢ ↑(fib (n + 2)) * ↑(fib n) - ↑(fib (n + 1)) ^ 2 = (-1) ^ (n + 1)
```

I needed to negate both sides, and turn the negation into a `-1` factor, and include it in the power on the RHS. Scouring the `Group` documentation again, I found `neg_sub` and `neg_eq_neg_one_mul`, and finally finished the proof.
## End result
Here's what I ended up with:

```lean
import Mathlib.Data.Nat.Fib.Basic

open Nat Int

theorem cassini_identity (n : ℕ) (n_pos : 0 < n) : fib (n + 1) * fib (n - 1) - fib n ^ 2 = (-1 : ℤ) ^ n := by
induction' n_pos with n n_pos IH
rfl
have h0 : fib (n - 1) + fib n = fib (n + 1) := by rw [fib_add_one]; rw [← zero_lt_iff]; exact n_pos
have h1 : fib (n + 1) * (fib (n - 1) + fib n) - fib n * (fib n + fib (n + 1)) = (-1 : ℤ) ^ n := by rw [mul_add, mul_add, sub_add_eq_sub_sub, add_sub_right_comm, add_sub_assoc]; nth_rewrite 4 [mul_comm]; simp; rw [← pow_two]; exact IH
rw [← ofNat_add, ← ofNat_add, ← fib_add_two, h0] at h1
rw [succ_eq_add_one, add_assoc, one_add_one_eq_two]
simp
rw [← neg_sub, pow_two]
nth_rewrite 2 [mul_comm]
rw [h1, neg_eq_neg_one_mul, pow_succ]
```

Seeing the `▶ goals accomplished 🎉` was pretty satisfying, but my code itself on the other hand, was not. I thought that there's probably a much less verbose way of doing this (that isn't just throwing together what I learnt from the NNG and whatever I happened to find in the documentation), so I [posted it](https://leanprover.zulipchat.com/#narrow/stream/113489-new-members/topic/Feedback.20for.20a.20proof.20of.20Cassini's.20identity) on the Zulip chat for feedback.

Unsurprisingly, I have a long way to go, since Kevin Buzzard gave this proof:
```lean
theorem cassini_identity (m : ℕ) :
    fib (m + 2) * fib m - fib (m + 1) ^ 2 = (-1 : ℤ) ^ (m + 1) := by
  induction m with
  | zero => rfl
  | succ n ih =>
    rw [Nat.succ_eq_add_one, pow_add, pow_one]
    repeat rw [fib_add_two] at *
    push_cast at *
    polyrith
```

_[appropriate spongebob sound effect]_

<audio controls src="/spongebob_end.wav"/>

Time to scour some more documentation.

## Reflection
I had seen before while self-studying analysis that we take a lot of the properties of arithmetic for granted, like commutativity, distributivity, associativity, etc. I'm no stranger to this level of detail, however this exercise was interesting because textbooks explicitly tell the reader that they can use these properties without comment after the corresponding section is over. A proof of this identity in a combinatorics book would definitely not warrant mention of the properties of arithmetic, however while formalizing it I really felt the weight of needing _everything_ to work.

Of course, I know that explicitly mentioning the properties of arithmetic in Lean is unnecessary (with `polyrith` in this case). However, it seems that this weight would persist as proofs use better tactics because there would always be equally more complex proofs to formalize.

## Next steps

Catalan's identity (a generalization of this idea) - $F_{n}^{2}-F_{n-m}F_{n+m}=(-1)^{n-m}F_{m}^{2}$ - seems like the obvious next exercise. Along with this, I'm thinking about the Lucas numbers (basically Fibonacci but with $2$ as the first element) as well; I remember that there were quite a few identities between the Lucas numbers and Fibonacci numbers. Furthermore, maybe thinking about formalizing linear recurrences in general might be interesting - the documentation says that there's stuff missing in `Mathlib.Algebra.LinearRecurrence`. I could also have a go at other combinatorial objects (Stirling's numbers are the first to come to my mind).

Aside from exercises, I will also read more about tactics in order to make my proofs more readable and easier to write. I will also read about formatting proofs in order to make them more pleasant.
